\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename nme.info
@include version.texi
@settitle Net Machine Emulator (NME) @value{VERSION}
@syncodeindex pg cp
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual is for Net Machine Emulator (version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}),
which is a networked, modular, extensible emulation system for various computational machines.
It currently has support for Sun2/3 and SPARC32/64 machines and depends on the libopenvpn package.

Copyright @copyright{} 2015-2026 Ruben Agin
@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Emulators
@direntry
* NME: (nme).   Net Machine Emulator
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Net Machine Emulator (NME)
@subtitle for version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author Ruben Agin (@email{phabrics@@phabrics.com})
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of the contents at the beginning.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Net Machine Emulator

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Overview:: Welcome to Net Machine Emulator
* Introduction:: What is NME?
* Installation:: Installing NME on a host system
* Running:: Invoking nmesh and other utilities
* Elements of NME:: Elements of NME
* GNU Free Documentation License::
* Index:: Complete index.
@end menu

@node Overview
@chapter Welcome to Net Machine Emulator

Net Machine Emulator, or NME, provides a general-purpose framework for
computer emulation or even hardware simulation. The end goal is to
create a library of modules, each being an element emulating a specific
machine component, like computer chip, bus, board, or anything else
needed to describe a ``machine'' at a higher level. In this context,
a machine is defined as a computational device, such as an actual
general-purpose computer like PC, desktop, workstation, or even a phone.
However, it can also be a special-purpose machine, such as a NIC, FPGA,
GPU, or even a hardware simulator in itself like a Verilog simulation.

In addition, it provides facilities for emulating standard external
components not part of the machine proper, such as displays and network
interfaces. As such, you can create fully working virtual machines
that work just like the physical hardware they are emulating.
These modules offer standard interfaces that allow you to
connect them together to create a whole machine emulation with minimum
effort and maximum efficiency.

NME is flexible enough to provide a provide a description at any level
of complexity. This is because it takes a reductionist approach rather
than the holistic approach of most other emulators. Those emulators are
usually designed for a specific machine or purpose such that they are
specialized to doing specific tasks required for those architectures.
Obviously, this can result in better performance at a higher level of
abstraction, but there is obviously a trade-off in the accuracy of
the description. As a result, they might miss some requirements needed
for more subtle operational features which could manifest as incorrect
or inaccurate operation under certain conditions.

While it might seem that these assembled machine emulations will
never be as fast as a single program designed from the beginning to
emulate a specific machine at a high level, the individual modules can
be specified at any level. So, in theory, a whole ``machine'' could
be described at a course-grained abstraction level, and then connected to
another machine assembled from fine-grained components. For instance,
if you're mainly interested in simulating a whole computer from a
component-based description, but have a peripheral ``machine'' that
might already be implemented by another emulation, it is possible
to connect them in a machine description with sufficient adapters.

The trade-off NME takes can be seen as the overhead of the interfaces
between components. These interfaces can be connected at compile-time
(components assembled via a static build into a complete program)
or at run-time (dynamic build with components implemented by
shared libraries loaded at run-time). Even if the component interfaces
might introduce some overhead when connected dynamically, the overhead
can be minimized by compiling the program statically with higher levels
of optimization applied. In addition, they allow a great deal of
reusability and flexibility for describing different machines with the
same components, and making it easier to assemble different configurations
more quickly to see how they work together. This should save a lot of
development and test time, resulting in quicker turnaround time for
prototyping new systems. Performance issues can be addressed later by,
e.g., faster hardware or LTO whole-program compilation.

@node Introduction
@chapter What is NME?

NME is a generic machine emulation system for emulating one or more
machines. Each of the machines is specified in a special, extensible
machine description language (MDL) called nmesh script. It includes an
interpreter for this language that is used to translate the
description into a working, dynamical system that emulates the
machine. The elements of the language are keywords that name
individual components of the machine. Each component is implemented
using dynamically loaded modules that are compiled directly into
native machine code. In this way, it is very similar to a virtual
machine and is what makes it so efficient compared to many other
systems which may interpret the individual component descriptions.

The machine description itself is interpreted, but it creates a
statically connected system comprised of multiple dynamic modules that
are themselves compiled. As each component keyword is translated, the
components they describe get instantiated. This means that the
component module is dynamically loaded into the main running
program. In addition, components are connected via the "at"
keyword. When they are connected, a communications path is established
between the components. The path is dependent upon the interfaces
presented by the components. This means that the components must have
compatible interfaces in order to be connected using "at". The
communications protocols are determined by the components as well, and
must obviously be compatible. In this way, the machine description
language is very close to how an actual technical specification might
be accomplished. This makes it a prime candidate for use in
prototyping systems as well as for distributing dynamic specifications
of production systems. It could also be a potential candidate for a
future board-level (or network-level) ESL system (like SystemC) that
actually compiles the MDL into an HDL such as Verilog or VHDL and from
there into actual hardware systems with associated software
toolchains. The possibilities are limitless!

A good way to think of NME is that it is to machines what SPICE is to
circuits. In SPICE, the components can be standard, primitive devices
like resistors, diodes, and transistors, described using physical
constraints. They can be connected to form complex electronic circuits
which may then be simulated. Models of new components can be created
in the SPICE language to provide novel circuit elements. In the same
way, the elements in NME can be standard "primitive" components like
ICs, memories, busses, or external devices like NICs and disk
drives. New types of components can be modelled by coding their
behaviour directly in C source code which, when compiled, exports the
required interfaces as dynamically loaded modules using the extremely
portable GNU libltdl. They are combined to form more complex systems
such as computers that may then be emulated.

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

NME is already available on some systems through their packaging
systems. First check if your host platform of choice has it available
as source to build or binaries to install from a ports or package manager,
respectively, as that might be easier.
This also has the advantage of addressing any peculiarities or
idiosyncracies that might arise on that platform. In that case, you should refer
to their documentation for how to install NME & associated packages on those systems.

If your system already has NME available through a ports or packages
management system, you can skip these steps, as they should be handled
automatically by them. One disadvantage is that they might not be
up-to-date with the latest distribution, so you should check if there is a
newer version available. In that case, you might want to build it
from scratch anyway to get the latest features and bug fixes. You
might also want to build directly from the github source repo, but
be aware that the tip could be broken at any point.

@menu
* Prerequisites:: Host package dependencies for building or using NME
* Building:: Building & installing NME on a host system
@end menu

@node Prerequisites
@section Prerequisites

Being a highly flexible, extensible emulation system, NME can take
advantage of many existing packages to provide certain services. As such, you
will want to install a number of these for smooth operation. If installing NME
from a ports or package management system, these dependencies should automatically
be handled for you. Likewise, you can probably find most, if not all, the
dependencies themselves in these packaging systems and install them directly from there.

@menu
* Required tools:: Tools needed to build from a source distribution
* Recommended libraries:: Recommended libraries providing host services
* Optional utilities:: Required if building from github repo
@end menu

@node Required tools
@subsection  Required tools needed to build a source distribution

If building from a source distribution of NME, you should first have
certain tools already installed on your host platform of choice.  The Required
tools should already be installed. On most major platforms of interest, these are
normally either available by default or through some sort of development meta-package.

@table @code

@item GCC or Clang/LLVM toolchain
NME has been successfully compiled using the two major non-VC toolchains

@item GNU Bison
For generating parser for nmesh input grammar, default YACC generally doesn't work

@item GNU Libtool
For building portable libraries

@item Make
Makefiles should be portable to GNU & BSD, at least, and possibly others

@item Perl
For included scripts like nme-sun-idprom & nme-sun-eeprom

@item pkgconf or pkg-config
For setting correct compiler & linker flags for package libraries

@end table

@node Recommended libraries
@subsection Recommended libraries that provide host services

It is highly suggested that you install the Recommended libraries, particularly
if you want a non-textual GUI. The Optional packages are for doing certain
tasks that you might need or want to do in some cases, like regenerating built
sources or automating tedious tasks. When building from source, the configure
step will inform you of any missing required dependencies, but not the
recommended or optional ones.

The @strong{libopenvpn} library is also provided
by the author and can be built with NME if included in the distribution.
It can also be downloaded on its own and either built & installed
before NME, or extracted into the libopenvpn subdirectory of the nme source root
to be built with it as a subproject.

@table @code

@item libopenvpn
Needed to build & run NME as well as for the openvpn networking host

@item GNU libltdl
Portable dynamic loader for using libtool. Built if not found on host system

@item Glib2
For glib threads; automatically included if GTK host enabled
      
@item GTK4 or GTK+3
To enable the gtk display host to emulate a monitor on a GUI

@item libvncserver
To enable the vnc display host to emulate monitor on a remote desktop

@item SDL3 or SDL2
To enable the sdl display host to emulate a monitor on a GUI and for sdl threads

@item libcpucycles
To use the optimal cycle counter found on the host platform

@end table

@node Optional utilities
@subsection Optional utilities required for building from github repo

If buildng NME directly from a branch of the github repository, the generated
build files are not checked in by default, so they will need to be regenerated.
In this case, you will need the Optional utilities from the @strong{GNU Build System}.

@table @code

@item GNU Bash
For running the nme-make-machs program

@item GNU Autoconf
For regenerating configure script if necessary

@item GNU Automake
For regenerating Makefiles if necessary

@item GNU M4
For regenerating shell scripts

@item GNU Texinfo
For regenerating this document

@item X11::Protocol Perl package
For regenerating keymap on X11 platforms

@end table

@node Building
@section Building & installing NME on a host system

NME uses the @strong{GNU Build Syastem} for portability. This ensures that
it should build & install on most major platforms out-of-the-box. 

This documents installing NME directly from source. This
should be the standard GNU install as documented in INSTALL.
Quickstart documentation can be found in the README.md file. Briefly, here
are the general steps to build from source. NME supports VPATH
builds, i.e., builds from directories outside the source tree, and
that is the $builddir variable referenced here, in which you can sustitute
your build directory of choice.

@enumerate

@item
tar xJf nme-<version>.tar.xz

@item
mkdir $builddir

@item
cd $builddir

@item
$srcdir/configure
useful options:
--enable-threads=<threadmodel>
--enable-hosts=<hosts>
--disable-shared
--enable-debug
see output of --help for more details

@item
make

@item
make install

@end enumerate

@node Running
@chapter Running

NME can run in one of two modes: headless or GUI. To run headless,
modify the nmesh script to create the machine with the terminal
connected to a serial port and disable the screen. To run GUI, keep
the screen configured.

@menu
* Usage::
* Guest Platforms::
@end menu

@node Usage
@section How to invoke and use NME
NME comes with a number of programs & utilities. The main program
is called @strong{nmesh}. It is used to interpret a machine
description, either from a file or interactively in a command-line
shell. The nmesh language is used to specify a machine through
a series of commands that instantiate elements and connect them
to other elements via the ``at'' command.

Default usage is to specify the machine description file as the command-line
argument: @code{nmesh <filename>}. nmesh will interpret the commands read from the file
and take the appropriate actions. Files can be either complete
or partial descriptions of machines. Thus, a single filen can have
a complete description of a machine. Alternatively, a machine
can be specified by a set of files, each describing a smaller machine
component that can be reused across different machine descriptions. Of course,
to do this, the element instances must be referenced consistently across
descriptions so that they can be connected appropriately.

Another way to do this is via the ``source'' command which takes the filename
as argument. In fact, the command-line just invokes this command to
accomplish the same thing. It can also be done by entering the command into
the nmesh shell. The shell can be started by using the -i option to nmesh.
From there, all the nmesh commands can be entered dynamically on the console
where they will be interpreted after the line is read in by pressing Enter.
The shell can be invoked with or without a filename, depending on
whether the machine is read in at the start or not. The command prompt will
pop up as ``nmesh>'' on each entry.

@code{nmesh -i [filename]}

@code{nmesh> source <filename>}

By default, NME runs in single-threaded mode, in which tasks are done
using cooperative multi-threading (fibers). In this way, everything runs
sequentially, which is useful for running on machines with fewer available
processor cores to map threads onto or virtual machines in hypervisors or
even other emulators. If you have a more powerful machine with more
cores, then you might consider switching into multi-threaded mode with
the -m option. It will compile with a particular threading model specified
with the configure --enable-threads option mentioned earlier.

When using a graphics display host, which are enabled by what is installed
and specified by the configure --enable-hosts option (default: all), if
you have sdl enabled, then you can specify full-screen on the command-line
with the -f option. You can also toggle it with the F11 key.

You can specify various cycle counters with the -c option. This
is more of a performance feature for being able to use what's available
on your machine to generate cycle counts for the timers used by NME. It
should be in order of accuracy of the timers on the platform, but you
can override the order by specifying a particular one (see options output).

Lastly, you can log the information or default outputs to a file by specifying
it with the --log option.  

@node Guest Platforms
@section Platforms that NME can run

nmesh is meant to be an extensible platform, meaning that it should be
good enough to run any machine description coded according to its
standards. The standards have yet to be documented outside of the
source code. Right now, the only guest machines available are sun2,
sun3, sun4c, and sun4u (ultra-1). These work reasonably well right
now, but stability improvements are an ongoing affair. They are meant
for demonstration purposes alone, but will run relatively complete
emulations of certain configurations as documented on the original NME
site.

Some guest operating systems have been tested as well. We will try to
document these as we test things out further. It is known that the
versions of NetBSD from 8.0 onward, can be directly installed and
run out-of-the-box. In addition, classic SunOS and Solaris versions
have been tested as well and work pretty well. In particular, SunOS-3.2
has been shown to work on the Sun2 guest. SunOS 4.1.4 has also been
brought up on the Sun4c guest. 

@node Elements of NME
@chapter Elements of NME

The core elements of a machine are organized in a filesystem hierarchy
that can be instantiated in the machine description. An instantiated
element is given a unique name that you specify, which can then be
referenced when connecting to other element instances using the ``at''
command.

Elements are implemented by a dynamically loaded modules that are opened
via the dlopen function. They have a particular interface that is used
to invoke them as instances through commands that call them by their
hierarchical name with optional arguments that can be specified in
the source code for the element.

When instantiated, an element's module will be loaded by the dynamic
loader, which calls a specific function in the module that initializes it.
It can then be connected to another element, which will then invoke
a connection routine which will set up all the things needed for the
two elements to communicate with eachother at run-time.

There are three basic types of elements: internal, bus, and host.
Internal elements are like the basic components of a machine. They
are general single computational devices, like microprocessors or
memories. Buses are interconnection elements that implement specific
bus protocols, like sbus or multibus. Host elements are the ones that
interact with the host and connect the machine to the outside world,
emulating external components like disk drives, monitors, input devices
and ethernet interfaces.

At this time, this document only briefly covers some host elements
that are directly implemented in NME. In some future revision, it will
go into some more detail on the other element types, which are much
more application-specific. In particular, it should document the API
for implementing these element types. For now, it is highly recommended
to consult the example machine descriptions included with NME (in the
machine subdirectory of source or installed in $installdir/nme/examples).

@menu
* Graphics:: Front-end displays for graphics output
* Network:: Connecting machines to the outside world
@end menu

@node Graphics
@section Graphics Elements

Graphics output on NME is supported through what are known as display hosts.
Each display host is implemented via a graphics library to provide
a front-end display for use by the NME guest machine. It is instantiated
inside the machine description. It is highly recommended
that you enable at least one of the display hosts on your host machine
by installing it on the system before building NME. All display hosts
can coexist in one instance of NME.

@menu
* gtk:: gtk display host
* sdl:: sdl display host
* vnc:: vnc display host
@end menu

@node gtk
@subsection gtk display host

NME supports versions 4 & 3 of GTK. You can create a frontend with a gtk
interface by invoking the appropriate line in the configuration file.
See examples in the machines directory for details.

@node sdl
@subsection sdl display host
NME supports versions 3 & 2 of SDL. You can create a frontend with a sdl
interface by invoking the appropriate line in the configuration file.
See examples in the machines directory for details.

@node vnc
@subsection vnc display host
NME supports the VNC protocol for displaying a framebuffer remotely.
This is done by using libvncserver library. You can create a remote
framebuffer through the appropriate line in the configuration file.
See examples in the machines directory for details.

@node Network
@section Network Elements

Network elements are implemented by several ethernet hosts. They all
use a type of device on the host that provide the ethernet configuration
and functionality.

@menu
* bpf:: bsd/bpf ethernet host
* tap:: tun/tap ethernet host
* netmap:: netmap/vale ethernet host
* openvpn:: openvpn ethernet hosts
@end menu

@node bpf
@subsection bsd/bpf ethernet host

The bpf device is the original method for ethernet configuration. It
still works & is still supported. Support for this method has also
been added on the Linux platform through the equivalent Linux Socket
Filter (LSF) facility. It allows a direct connection to an adapter,
but may not work on all adapters, particularly on Linux hosts. Because
of this limitation, support for TAP devices was added.

@node tap
@subsection tun/tap ethernet host

tap devices make a tap device, which is basically a pseudo-ethernet
adapter that is created on demand. This is as opposed to a real
hardware ethernet adapter. It is basically an ethernet adapter that
runs in software only in the kernel. See the sample nmesh scripts for
examples. It can be configured with an ip address, which basically
acts as a gateway to the host machine. The guest machine can be
configured with an ip address in the same subnet as the tap device,
thus allowing for communication between host & guest. Afterwards, a
bridge or a NAT can be set up to the adapter, if communication with
the external net is desired.

It is possible to combine bpf and tap devices to create NAT
networks.

@node netmap 
@subsection netmap/vale ethernet host

netmap is relatively more recent advancement in network interface access
technology that eschews the traditional read/write functionality of other I/O methods
in favor of a direct memory access approach. In this way, it
provides a more efficient, granular way to access the data in network
interfaces than other methods. This allows for very fast, bulk data transfers
without involving too many system calls or unnecessary copies.

Like the other methods, it is implemented as a kernel module, but it provides
the user with a direct memory access path to a network interface's data
transport mechanisms. This enables a user-space process to transfer data
directly without having to call I/O functions for every packet.
Instead of calling read or write functions to receive or transmit each
data packet, a memory-mapped region is provided by netmap that contains
one or more pairs of rings for tx/rx to or from the appropriate network device and
a pool of pre-allocated buffers to hold packets.

One simply cycles through the receive or transmit rings, each of which contains 
slots each of which points to a pre-allocated buffer. In this way,
there is no need to send memory buffers to the kernel to be copied in or out.
The host and network interface can read or write data directly to the ring buffers
independently, synchronizing only when necessary via blocking (poll) or non-blocking (ioctl)
I/O functions to indicate data or empty slot availability depending on ownership.

When a netmap device is opened, it takes control of a physical NIC (port) or a
virtual ethernet switch depending upon the name of the device. If the device is
an existing port, then the datapath is disconnected from the host and is directly controlled by the program.
The program can reconnect the datapath to the host by directly forwarding packets.
If the device name is of the form ``valeSSS:PPP'', then a virtual switch is
created if it doesn't exist, or connected to the named port if it does. NME's
netmap host takes the name of the switch and ports as optional arguments (vswitch
and port, respectively) and will create the named switch if necessary. See the
example machine descriptions for more info.

Obviously, netmap is a very sophisticated, advanced technology and is the latest
ethernet host implemented by NME. As such, it is recommended that nthe documentation
for netmap be consulted for a much better, more complete understanding of its
operation. In terms of NME host usage, it should work similarly to bpf.

@node openvpn 
@subsection openvpn ethernet hosts

NME networking capabilities are expanded using the OpenVPN tools.  These
come included with NME to provide alternate methods for network access,
besides the built-in BPF and TAP.  One advantage of using these is that,
in some cases, they allow for greater portability to platforms that
don't have native BPF or TAP.  Another pro is that OpenVPN provides
value-added capabilities such as encryption, fragmentation, compression,
virtual networking, and scripting.  These can be used to greatly
expand the domain of application to larger systems.  There is an
ongoing effort to bring in more of this functionality over time.

To begin with, some OpenVPN capability has been imported using modules
that map to certain elements in the OpenVPN program.  In particular,
TUN/TAP devices and link sockets are two new NME elements that
can be used to network machines and hosts.  The elements can
be thought of as subsets of OpenVPN itself, with the capabilities
specified using the same command-line options that it provides.
Some will work and some won't, depending on what has been implemented,
and what is needed for that element.

The following subsections outline these methods.

@menu
* OpenVPN TUN/TAP Devices::
* OpenVPN Socket Link Devices::
@end menu

@node OpenVPN TUN/TAP Devices
@subsubsection OpenVPN TUN/TAP Devices

Preliminary support for OpenVPN is now provided for the purposes of
creating and using TAP devices on multiple platforms.  OpenVPN is
compiled in as another host module, with a special tap leaf interface,
that uses the same options as OpenVPN itself.  See the OpenVPN docs
for further information.

In particular, it can be used to configure tap interfaces with IP
or IPv6 addresses.  It can also be used to run postconfiguration scripts
that can, e.g., set up NAT using the filter rules appropriate to the
platform.  Here is a sample line that can be used to accomplish
these:

@code{tap0 at le0: nme/host/openvpn/tap --dev tap --ifconfig 10.0.77.1 255.255.255.0 --ifconfig-ipv6 "2001:db8::1/64" "2001:db8::2" --tun-ipv6 --up nat.sh}

Note that this is currently the only way to get networking support
under Windows.  

@node OpenVPN Socket Link Devices
@subsubsection OpenVPN Socket Link Devices

OpenVPN provides network links via sockets, for the purposes of creating
private networks over existing L3 networks, using IP protocols.  We
use this to expand ethernet networking capability with P2P links between
network elements of machines on different host machines or networks.  These
links are also known as tunnels because they can be used to make virtual
networks through physical networks.

The usage is quite simple:  network elements are connected to link elements
in the same fashion as they are connected to other devices.  You can think
of them as virtual ethernet or TAP devices.  The link elements are paired
together, and can be in the same or other machine configurations to provide
a bridge for the ethernet traffic to flow between them.

Link elements are paired by IP address.  They are implemented using sockets,
so they have a local and remote address.  The local address must be specified;
the remote may be specified or floating.  The encapsulating protocol may be
specified as UDP (stateless) or TCP (session-oriented).  In the latter case,
both machines must be running and connected for either to proceed.

The sample machine configurations provide examples of different scenarios where
they might be used.  The simplest is a peer-to-peer connection between two
machines (or even two elements theoretically).  This demonstrates the extreme
flexibility of NME in specifying different network configurations over other
networks which might not have the needed resources or topology.  In particular,
TAP devices aren't available on every platform (ex: Cygwin).  You can bridge
between a platform that doesn't and one that does to give external network
access.  Once again, the possibilities are limited only by the firewalls.  You
can also use proxies to overcome this (not yet implemented, but coming soon),
or customize the firewall rules.

Here is the peer-to-peer connection specification:

Machine A -
@code{link0 at le0: nme/host/openvpn/socket/link --dev tap --local 192.168.0.1 --remote 192.168.0.2}

Machine B -
@code{link1 at le0: nme/host/openvpn/socket/link --dev tap --local 192.168.0.2 --remote 192.168.0.1}

This creates a network of two machines, but no external access.

Here's a network description that allows for two remote machines, each on different hosts, to be connected to
two local machines, networked using the BPF/TAP combo, and connected externally via AutoNAT.

Host 1:
Machine A -
@code{tap1: nme/host/tun/tap inet 10.0.77.1 netmask 255.255.255.0 bcast 10.0.77.255}
@code{link2 at tap1: nme/host/openvpn/socket/link --dev tap --local 192.168.0.1 --remote 192.168.0.2 --proto tcp-server}
@code{bpf1 at le0: nme/host/bsd/bpf interface tap0}

Machine B -
@code{link3: nme/host/openvpn/socket/link --dev tap --local 192.168.0.1 --lport 1195 --remote 192.168.0.3}
@code{bpf1 at le0: nme/host/bsd/bpf interface tap0}
@code{bpf2 at link3: nme/host/bsd/bpf interface tap0}

Host 2:
Machine B -
@code{link4 at le0: nme/host/openvpn/socket/link --dev tap --local 192.168.0.2 --remote 192.168.0.1 --proto tcp-client}

Machine D -
@code{link5 at le0: nme/host/openvpn/socket/link --dev tap --local 192.168.0.3 --remote 192.168.0.1 1195}

To avoid confusion, element names in the samples are unique, but the actual names of elements are unimportant,
so long as they are unique within a single machine configuration.  Also, when connecting more than one link,
different ports must be used (or the addresses must otherwise be unique, perhaps using different interfaces).
OpenVPN allows for shared ports, but it hasn't been tested yet.  The default protocol is UDP, but TCP can be
used as well, using the --proto argument to the openvpn element as shown above.

As you can tell, this can get pretty complicated.  The following subsection is a discussion of the BPF/TAP
network bridge, for making a local network on the host.  The capabilities and documentation will continue
to improve, but NME is a great platform for experimentation.  Perhaps, there are other configurations
that have yet to be thought of... or better ways of accomplishing these tasks.  There are no correct methods,
but these idioms are a good starting point.

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

@include fdl.texi

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye

